13. Replace Builders with Free Functions (#62)
Babylonpartners/ios-playbook: TechnicalDocuments/Proposals/BuildersToFunctions.md

    private let modal: Flow
    private let presenting: Flow
    private let builders: ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders

    public init(navigation: Flow,
                modal: Flow,
                presenting: Flow,
                builders: ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders) {
        self.navigation = navigation
        self.modal = modal
        self.presenting = presenting
        self.builders = builders
    }
```

One would:

```swift
struct ClinicalRecordsFlowController {
    private let navigation: Flow
    private let modal: Flow
    private let presenting: Flow

    public init(navigation: Flow,
                modal: Flow,
                presenting: Flow) {
        self.navigation = navigation
        self.modal = modal
        self.presenting = presenting
    }
```

Particular medical histories (e.g. for minors) can also be created, but in this case, the minor session would be passed instead of relying on `Current`. This situation (with child builders) can be observed at `ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders.swift`:

```swift
extension Builder {
    struct ClinicalRecords {
        static func makeMedicalHistory(with session: Session, flow: Flow) -> UIViewController 

>         static func makeMedicalHistory(flow: Flow) -> UIViewController

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, the minor's is the one with the `session` param, right? 
I'd change the method name to avoid confusion defining better the difference.

Author: yeah you are correct.

    }
}
```

This would remove the intricate structure we have with builders and their children and protocols.

> ## Impact on an existing codebas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Impact on an existing codebase
```

As a proposal on its own, it wouldn't have any immediate impact. For new features, and assuming `UserSession` in `Current` is in place, those could start using this approach. **Builders that don't rely on `UserSession` could be migrated immediately**. 

## Alternatives considered

Using Ilya's suggestion about structs with functions as properties, versus static free functions. The overall goals of the proposal are preserved and it provides flexibility for testing. 

---

Decision made during the call:

1. Popular Vote: Use/Move UserSession (not the entity, but what it represents), to `Current`. **Majority has approved.**
2. Popular Vote: In favour of the original proposal to use static builder methods. **Majority has approved.**
   1. Amendment to the original proposal: **by default** `FlowControllers` will only be injected with `Flows`, but if testing is deemed, then further dependencies can be passed.

>      

Reviewer: I see `analytics` being often triggered in flowControllers. 
And along with this, (if it's still an assumption) just `Builder`s can access `Current`, so then analytics can be injected to a flowController.

Author: analytics should be in `ViewModels` not FlowControllers.

extension Builder  {
    enum Alert {
            static func makeAlert(for error: CoreError, dismiss: (() -> Void)?) -> UIAlertController
            static func makeAlert(for message: String, title: String?, dismiss: (() -> Void)?) -> UIAlertController
            static func makeAlert(for error: AlertError,
                                  primaryAction: UIAlertAction,
                                  secondaryAction: UIAlertAction) -> UIAlertController
    }
}
```

This would allow us to remove the protocol `AlertBuilder` and remove all the compliances across the codebase. From a usage point of view:

```swift
final class AppointmentListFlowController {
    let primary: Flow
    let secondary: Flow

    init(primary: Flow, secondary: Flow) {
        self.primary = primary
        self.secondary = secondary
    }

    func handle(_ route: AppointmentListViewModel.Route) {
        switch route {
        case let .showAlert(error):
            Builder.Alert.makeAlert(for: error, dismiss: secondary.dismiss)
                |> secondary.present
        }
    }
}
```

I will provide further examples in the proposal

## Motivation

There are a couple of reasons for this change:

> 1. It was decided that DI via `Current` would happen at the builders level. This means that the requirement to inject dependencies via initializer, in builders, cease to exist. This would remove: protocols, clean FlowControllers APIs and dissolve the concept of child builders. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. It was decided that DI via `Current` would happen at the builder level. This means that the requirement to inject dependencies via the initializer, in builders, ceases to exist. This would: remove protocols, clean FlowController's APIs and dissolve the concept of child builders. 
```

2. It would become easier to find factory methods to construct screens. One could just type `Builder.` and Xcode would autocomplete with the available factory methods. It would also free engineers from wasting too much time finding dependencies if they are immediately accessible via `Current` and the namespaced free functions. This is not a justification for engineers to not understand the codebase and how to do things "properly". It is simply an observation of how cumbersome passing dependencies via initializer is, the raison d'être for `Current` and the overall way of creating screens (VM + VC + FC). 

The first point is about simplicity and clean-up of multiple ways of creating screens, while the second point focuses on discoverability and development ergonomics.   

## Proposed solution

> **Note:** The proposed solution assumes that a way to authenticate HTTP requests is available at `Current` level (in this case something in the shape of `MainUserSession` abstracted via `UserSession`).

Reviewer 3: Is it a part of this proposal to move `MainUserSession` or any other network related instances into `Current`? How can we discuss an approach that is based on something that is not in place and that we previously explicitly agreed not to do? I'd suggest to first discuss requirements for this approach to be possible.

Author: It's called an assumption.

Reviewer 3: That I agree with, but as I said this change requires a separate discussion. What will be an outcome of this proposal if the decision will be that we don't change our approach with `Current`?

Author: Based on a preliminary and informal assessment with a couple of members of the team, moving `MainUserSession` to `Current` seems to be desirable, especially by @daniloaliberti since it would make his work easier (with the `Current` migration). 

In any case, if we don't move `MainUserSession` to `Current`, we will park this.

Reviewer: To be more precise: to move `AppConfiguration` to Current, there's the `tabs` typed as `protocol TabContentBuilder` type, which declares a `make` method with a parameter of type `AuthenticatedTabContentBuildingMaterials`.
Considering such Material (and others) can be created from `Current`, then `tabs` construction would be much simpler.

Reviewer 4: We have SDK's to do what MainUsesession does and if we go to this route we will never consume our SDK's. 
And if there is a big issue for us then maybe this is the same for our customers and we should rethink the SDK strategy.

Author: The name "`MainUserSession`" is used as an umbrella name to refer to an entity that is able to make authenticated and non-authenticated requests. That entity would use the SDK.

Reviewer 3: I think @viorel15 actually raised a good point. We may have two orthogonal goals here - one is consuming sdk, another is making user session accessible globally to enable this approach (or any other approach that would avoid passing builder instances around and injecting session into them). 
We can though make `Current` consume session object from SDK (I assume there is something like that) to solve it.

Author: @viorel15 Please let's stay on point. If you want to discuss the usage of `MainUserSession` and SDK, let's start the discussion somewhere else. Neither has anything to do with this proposal.

Reviewer 4: It's fine. I understood that for this proposal it does not matter if it's main user session as it is now or refactored to include the SDK's.

Reviewer 3: @daniloaliberti this problem (dependency of app configuration on session) seems to be a real monster here, is it agreed that moving user session in the `Current` is the solution we going forward? Because there is also a parallel discussion of refactoring MainUserSession, which may solve it in a different way (I'm not up to date with it).
This problem also makes me wonder about other requirements of `AuthenticatedTabContentBuildingMaterials`, what happens with them? And another question is do we really need that in `BabylonDependencies` and `Current` specifically? It would be better to discuss that in a different channel not to diverge this discussion.

Let's use `MedicalHistoryBuilder.swift` as an example, since it offers a trivial API: 

``` swift
init(session: UserSession, visuals: VisualDependenciesProtocol)
```

And the corresponding public API:

```swift
func make(modal: Flow) -> UIViewController
```

Given the Module where it's located it could be migrated to:

```swift
extension Builder {
    enum ClinicalRecords {

>         func makeMedicalHistory(modal: Flow) -> UIViewController

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        static func makeMedicalHistory(modal: Flow) -> UIViewController
```

>         static func makeMedicalHistory(modal: Flow) -> UIViewController

Reviewer 5: I wander if it make to have them as `var` closures? So you would be able stub them if we start to unit test `FlowControllers`.

Author: How would you make the default value to use `Current`?

Reviewer 5: ```
enum Builder {
    static var buildVC: () -> UIViewController = {
        let analitics = Current.analyticsService
        return UIViewController()
    }
}
```

Reviewer 5: But the issue now is that it's mutable 🙈

Reviewer 3: @sergdort It's fine and exactly the same how we agreed to use `Current` in builders. It's mutable now but we can just change it to `public internal(set) var Current: World = .production` to allow mutation only from tests using `@tesable import`

    }
}
```

Particular medical histories (e.g. for minors) can also be created, but in this case, the minor session would be passed instead of relying on `Current`. This situation (with child builders) can be observed at `ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders.swift`:

```swift
extension Builder {
    enum ClinicalRecords {

>         func makeMedicalHistory(with session: Session, modal: Flow) -> UIViewController

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        static func makeMedicalHistory(with session: Session, modal: Flow) -> UIViewController
```

>         func makeMedicalHistory(modal: Flow) -> UIViewController

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        static func makeMedicalHistory(modal: Flow) -> UIViewController
```

    }
}
```

> This would remove the intricated structure we have with builders and its children.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This would remove the intricate structure we have with builders and their children.
```

> A side effect of this approach, because we are dealing with functions (versus structs) we are able to remove local state. An example of such case is `enableClinicalDownloads` at `ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders`. You can see the code smell here:

Reviewer 3: what are you referring to as a "code smell" here and what will not be possible with free functions? what is "local state" in this example?

Reviewer 2: Code smell:
`enableClinicalDownloads` is state local to the builder. Having it like this obscures the fact that this is actually is a flag passed in from `dependencies.appConfiguration.enableClinicalDownloads`. If the builder methods that need it just referenced `Current` it would be clear. Right now you have to find out where the builder is initialised to know how that flag is set.

> A side effect of this approach, because we are dealing with functions (versus structs) we are able to remove local state. An example of such case is `enableClinicalDownloads` at `ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders`. You can see the code smell here:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A side effect of this approach, because we are dealing with functions (versus structs) we are able to remove local state. An example of this is `enableClinicalDownloads` in `ClinicalRecordsChildBuilders`. You can see the code smell here:
```

> 

Reviewer: `enableClinicalDownloads` is passed through a long chain until appointment detail. 
A clear example of refactor to start using the convenience of Current. 
Also it seats in appConfiguration and that's the big rock what I'm moving to Current atm. 👍

```swift
builders.appointmentList(with: session,
                         enableClinicalDownloads: builders.enableClinicalDownloads,
                         addressSwitches: builders.addressSwitches)
```

With the free functions approach, this would never be possible to do, since builders don't hold state:

```swift
extension Builder {
    enum ClinicalRecords {

>         func makeAppointmentList(session: UserSession,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        static func makeAppointmentList(session: UserSession,
```

                                 enableClinicalDownloads: Bool,
                                 addressSwitches: AddressSwitchesProtocol,
                                 primary: Flow,
                                 secondary: Flow) -> UIViewController
    }
}
```

At the call site, we would replace this:

```swift
case let .appointmentList(session):
    builders
            .appointmentList(with: session,
                             enableClinicalDownloads: builders.enableClinicalDownloads,
                             addressSwitches: builders.addressSwitches)
            .make(primary: navigation, secondary: modal)
            |> navigation.present
```

With this:

```swift
case let .appointmentList(session):
    Builder.ClinicalRecords
            .makeAppointmentList(with: session,
                                enableClinicalDownloads: enableClinicalDownloads,

>                                 addressSwitches: addressSwitches,

Reviewer 2: So would `addressSwitches` and `enableClinicalDownloads` be injected into the FlowController (from the builder that created it)? I think they both come from `AppConfiguration` or a similar "global" dependency.

Author: If they come globally, they would be read from `Current`.

                                primary: navigation,
                                secondary: modal)
            |> navigation.present
```

## Impact on an existing codebase

As Ilya pointed out it would make unit testing a bit more cumbersome. That's the case because you no longer inject builders. I would like to make the case for the following:

1. We don't test `FlowControllers` with Unit tests anyway. This is not a reason to not do it, it's simply difficult to justify time doing so, when there are more important pieces to be tested and those tests would bring, in my opinion, little value. More value would be achieved by the next point (**2.**).

> 2. We can test that a particular navigation/flow is done as expected independently of this proposal being approved or not. For that to happen we simply observe a ViewModel state and assert on it, since we derive routes from the state.

Reviewer 3: That's what we already do in some view model tests, I think, but asserting routes is not the same as testing flows, it only tests view model part, but the bug can be (and we had such cases not that long time ago) in the flow controller.
Also considering proposal to use feedbacks for navigation we will not have routes any more.

Author: This proposal is independent of any other proposal.

> 3. If we "really" want to test FlowControllers, it's still possible by mocking `Current`, which is something trivial to achieve (`World.init()`). The difference here is that we can't say we are **Unit** testing FlowControllers, but instead these become **Integration** tests. I personally don't feel this is semantically significant. 

Reviewer 3: By mocking `Current` we will be only able to mock the network session (assuming it is there which is not the case ATM). Builder methods provide view controllers as a black box and do not provide any access to underlying view models so there is no way to act on them in tests if builder is not injected or can't be overridden in any other way. So we wouldn't be able for example to write a test that would trigger a UI action in presented view model that is supposed to dismiss its screen and then assert that flow controller actually dismisses it by calling `dismiss` on a flow.

We currently rely heavily on automation tests for testing flows, but it does not mean IMO that we should not look into unit testing flow controllers. Unit tests have important advantages over automation tests (easier to write, faster to execute), which does not mean we should drop automation in favour of unit tests either. We should use any tools at our disposal (in a suitable way ofc) to ensure quality.

Author: Based on Anders suggestion, we would mock at a higher level, not at the network level. As I previously said, one thing is to have an aspiration to do something which is what your critique aims at:

> So we wouldn't be able for example to write a test that would trigger a UI action in presented view model that is supposed to dismiss its screen and then assert that flow controller actually dismisses it by calling dismiss on a flow.

You can still write your tests, integrations tests in this case, and they would be as fast as any other unit test since they don't rely on UI as well. I am not going to spend more time debating this point, simply because I already provided an alternative for testing, that doesn't rely on UI Automation.

Reviewer 3: Then please provide an example of such test.

Author: We are not doing any sort of those tests, so there isn't even an accepted way across the team on how to test, which is precisely my point. In any case:

```swift
world = World()
world.userSession = MockedUserSession() 

var isCalled = false
let mockedFlow = { isCalled = true }
let shouldntBeCalled = { fatalError() }

let flowController = AFlowController(navigation: mockedFlow, model: shouldntBeCalled)
flowController.handle(.aState)

XCTAssert(isCalled == true)
```

This would test that the right flow is presented.

Reviewer 3: My concern is not about a `handle` method that is being tested in this example, but about testing how flow controller reacts on UI actions from presented view models.

Author: It feels that you are talking about integration tests, where you assert an entire flow from a ViewModel action down to a flowController "reaction". Assuming @sergdort 's proposal would be accepted (again this is a weak argument from my side, because it's a big assumption), you could just inject mocked FlowControllers Feedback into the VM and assert on those.

Reviewer 3: I'm talking about unit testing flow controller in isolation of their environment like real builders and other real view models. Injecting mocked feedback is something one would do in unit tests of view model, not flow controller which would define such feedback. This feedback is something that should be tested (as we test other feedbacks, why wouldn't we test some of them)

Author: Not sure what you want to achieve with testing FlowControllers in isolation. to make sure you get the right method being called in a builder? Is that it?

Author: That can be tested by passing the dismiss state to the `handler` and asserting on the flow.

Reviewer 3: This would be a state of a presented view model, where and how it will be passed to the flow controller that presented it?  There will be no access to this view model from the test.

Author: You can pass via a handler as part of the state, that would be called once the presented screen is dismissed. For example `.showScreen(someData, dismissHandler)`

Reviewer 3: How this would help to test that `flow.dismiss` is called in the following implementation?

```swift
func handle(_ route: Route) {
  switch route {
    case let .showScreen(someData, dismissHandler):
       Builder.Something.makeSomething(someData, onDismiss: { result in
          flow.dismiss() { dismissHandler(result) }
       } |> flow.present
  }
}
```

Author: You assert that `dismissHandler` is called. 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer 3: the fact that `dismissHandler` has little to do with ensuring that `dismiss` (or any other method, it can be `popToRoot` or something) is called on the proper flow (flow most likely will be a mock implementation as well). Also one could write it as

```
flow.dismiss()
dismissHandler()
```

This may be completely fine implementation in some cases, but not all. So here `dismissHandler` will be caller regardless of `flow.dismiss` being called at all or being called on a correct flow instance.

Reviewer 5: From `FC` perspective you usually what to unit test that providing a `route` it calls correct method on builder and correct `flow`. I not sure what else we would be interested in?

Author: The builder method, with the current proposal, wouldn't be possible in a straightforward way. The flow calling would be.

Author: @ilyapuchka quoting yourself:

> I'd be fine dismissing my concern about testability

I think we already agreed that:

1. We are not testing those particular scenarios, currently, independently of this proposal
2. We have no plans to do so in the short/medium term.
3. Critical paths of the App are already covered with UI Automation.

I am unsure why we keep going around this point.

Reviewer 6: The example shared shows how to test FC if/when needed, the SUT needs to be atomic so we either test the FC or the VM but not both at the same time, that enters the territory of Acceptance/Integration Tests where UI Tests have clear advantages as you don't need to be aware of all the underlying implementation.

Given all those points, it has no impact, since we don't test that layer and there are currently no plans in the short term to do so. 

> There is still the question about moving `UserSession`, or something in that shape, to `Current`. Based on an initial conversation with Anders, and quoting him, it would be a "fairly low" effort. This is for me a point that should be thought carefully and be a reason to reject this proposal. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is still the question about moving `UserSession`, or something in that shape, to `Current`. Based on an initial conversation with Anders, and quoting him, it would be a "fairly low" effort. This is for me a point that should be thought about carefully and could be a reason to reject this proposal. 
```

As a proposal on its own, it wouldn't have any immediate impact. For new features, and assuming `UserSession` in `Current` is in place, those could start using this approach. Builders that don't rely on `UserSession` could be migrated immediately. 

## Alternatives considered

> Leave as is.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should leave things as it is, this issues was brought up multiple times in the past and by ignoring it we don't achieve anything, it's good to see things moving forward with this proposal. But we can maybe explore alternative solutions which will not compromise testability.

Here is a possible alternative to consider:

```swift
extension Builder {
  struct ClinicalRecords {
    var makeMedicalHistory: (_ modal: Flow) -> UIViewController = { /* implementation here */ }
  }
}
```

We don't have to provide any dependencies to this builder because it can access `Current` or just create what is needed in the builder method implementation (at most inject only session into it), but we will be able to override this in unit test and use a view model double instead of a real one. A downside of using closures here is that we can't use named parameters on the call site.

This is similar to pointfree approach, describe [here](https://www.pointfree.co/blog/posts/21-how-to-control-the-world):

```swift
struct API {
  var setToken = { APIClient.shared.token = $0 }
  var fetchCurrentUser = APIClient.shared.fetchCurrentUser
}
```

Reviewer 2: In your suggested approach, where would these Builder structs be created? We need to ensure that the builder methods were immutable in production code.

Reviewer 3: I think they may be created at the same places where they are created now, we just remove constructor parameters from them. Or we may create them where we need them which is in flow controllers, as default values for their arguments:

```swift
class ClinicalRecords {
  init(builder: Builder.ClinicalRecords = Builder.ClinicalRecords())
}
```

Author: This is a different design decision/direction and as such, if you would like to propose something else, please feel free to do so in a different place, after there's an outcome for this proposal.

Reviewer 3: I don't see how this would be better than amending this proposal.

Author: I am not vouching for that change since it goes in a different direction: it still uses builders as entities that you pass around.

Reviewer 3: > it still uses builders as entities that you pass around.
this is not needed with default initialiser parameters. Approach we already use in `Current`.

```swift
extension Builder {
    struct ClinicalRecords {

>         internal(set) var makeMedicalHistory: (Flow) -> UIViewController = { _ in UIViewController() }

Reviewer 3: Unfortunate negative effect of that, as I was mentioning as cons, is that now on call site we wouldn't be able to use named arguments. Static functions don't have it. We could solve it, if needed, with adding a method wrapping such closure:

```swift
struct ClinicalRecords {
    internal(set) var makeMedicalHistory: (Flow) -> UIViewController = { _ in 
        return UIViewController() 
    }
    func makeMedicalHistory(flow: Flow) -> UIViewController {
        return self.makeMedicalHistory(flow)
    }
}
```
I haven't compiled this code but I don't think it will result in ambiguity or something. This is a bit of boilerplate so maybe not worth it.
